.\" Manpage for encryptoni
.\" Contact: github.com/abhoy009/encryptoni
.TH ENCRYPTONI 1 "June 2025" "encryptoni 1.0.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
encrypt_decrypt, cryption \- parallel file encryption engine using AES-256-GCM

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B encrypt_decrypt
.I <directory>
.B \-\-action
.I <encrypt|decrypt>
.RB [ \-\-mode
.IR serial|fork|thread ]
.RB [ \-\-password
.IR password ]
.PP
.B cryption
.I "<filepath>,<ENCRYPT|DECRYPT>"
.RB [ \-\-password
.IR password ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B encryptoni
is a parallel file encryption suite that encrypts and decrypts files using
industry-standard
.B AES-256-GCM
authenticated encryption with
.B PBKDF2
key derivation (100,000 iterations, SHA-256).
.PP
.B encrypt_decrypt
operates on all files in a directory recursively.
It supports three execution modes: serial, fork-based multiprocessing, and
POSIX thread-based multithreading.
.PP
.B cryption
operates on a single file. The action (ENCRYPT or DECRYPT) is embedded in the
argument string alongside the file path.
.PP
All encrypted files are written atomically via a temp-file-and-rename strategy.
A 44-byte header is prepended: 16-byte salt, 12-byte IV, 16-byte GCM
authentication tag, followed by the ciphertext. Decryption verifies the GCM tag
before committing the plaintext; a tampered ciphertext causes an explicit failure
with no data written.

.SH OPTIONS
.SS encrypt_decrypt options

.TP
.I <directory>
Path to the directory to process. All regular files are included recursively.
Hidden files (dot-prefixed) and temporary files (\fB.tmp_enc\fR, \fB.tmp_dec\fR)
are skipped automatically.

.TP
.BR \-\-action " " \fI<encrypt|decrypt>\fR
Required. Selects the operation to perform.

.TP
.BR \-\-mode " " \fI<serial|fork|thread>\fR
Optional. Selects the execution mode. Default is
.BR serial .
.RS
.TP
.B serial
Process files sequentially on the main thread.
.TP
.B fork
Spawn worker processes using
.BR fork (2).
Uses
.BR mmap (2)
with \fBMAP_SHARED|MAP_ANONYMOUS\fR and lock-free atomic counters for
inter-process task coordination. Achieves the highest throughput on multi-core
machines (4x speedup vs. serial on a 1\~GB benchmark).
.TP
.B thread
Spawn worker threads using
.BR pthread_create (3).
Uses a
.BR pthread_mutex_t
for task index coordination. Achieves approximately 1.3x speedup vs. serial.
.RE

.TP
.BR \-\-password " " \fI<password>\fR
Supply the encryption/decryption password directly on the command line.
This sets the
.B ENCRYPTONI_PASSWORD
environment variable for the duration of the process.
See
.B PASSWORD RESOLUTION
below.

.TP
.BR \-\-help
Print usage information and exit.

.SS cryption options

.TP
.I "<filepath>,<ENCRYPT|DECRYPT>"
A single comma-separated argument containing the file path and action.
Example: \fB"./secret.txt,ENCRYPT"\fR

.TP
.BR \-\-password " " \fI<password>\fR
Same semantics as in
.BR encrypt_decrypt .

.TP
.BR \-\-help
Print usage information and exit.

.SH PASSWORD RESOLUTION
Passwords are resolved in the following priority order:

.IP "1." 4
.B \-\-password
flag passed on the command line.

.IP "2."
.B ENCRYPTONI_PASSWORD
environment variable (set in the calling shell or exported upstream).

.IP "3."
A
.B .env
file in the current working directory containing a line of the form:
.PP
.RS 8
.B PASSWORD=mysecretpassword
.RE

.PP
If no password is found by any of the above methods, the program exits with
an error.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ENCRYPTONI_PASSWORD
Encryption/decryption password. Overrides \fB.env\fR file lookup.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B .env
Optional file in the current working directory.
Must contain a line of the form \fBPASSWORD=<value>\fR.

.SH EXAMPLES
Encrypt all files in \fB./documents\fR using 4-core fork mode:
.PP
.RS
.B encrypt_decrypt ./documents --action encrypt --mode fork --password s3cr3t
.RE

.PP
Decrypt the same directory serially:
.PP
.RS
.B encrypt_decrypt ./documents --action decrypt --mode serial
.RE

.PP
Encrypt a single file with
.BR cryption :
.PP
.RS
.B cryption "./report.pdf,ENCRYPT" --password s3cr3t
.RE

.PP
Decrypt a single file:
.PP
.RS
.B cryption "./report.pdf.enc,DECRYPT" --password s3cr3t
.RE

.PP
Use environment variable instead of flag:
.PP
.RS
.B export ENCRYPTONI_PASSWORD=s3cr3t
.br
.B encrypt_decrypt ./photos --action encrypt --mode thread
.RE

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred (invalid arguments, filesystem error, or authentication
failure during decryption).

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR openssl (1),
.BR make (1),
.BR fork (2),
.BR mmap (2),
.BR pthread_create (3)

.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: \fBhttps://github.com/abhoy009/encryptoni/issues\fR

.SH AUTHORS
Abhoy Das <\fIgithub.com/abhoy009\fR>
